It's time to talk about
an extraordinarily common,
often used and pretty neat concept,
an immediately invoked
function expression or
an IIFE, an I-I-F-E.
What are immediately invoked
function expressions?
How do they work and why are they useful?
Let's look.
So we've already seen the difference
between function statements and
function expressions.
A function statement
happens as a new statement,
where function is the first word either
on a new line, maybe after a semi-colon.
Function, let's say greet,
takes a name and
then let's say, I just output that name.
Just for starters, so that's a statement.
JavaScript sees this,
it puts it into memory.
But when it begins to execute,
when it comes to this line it
doesn't really execute anything.
You actually have to invoke it for
it to execute.
So we know that and
the function's already in memory,
then we have a function expression.
For example, I can use a function
expression to set a variable
equal to it and
I can have anonymous function, like this.
And maybe it's the same function,
essentially.
So, I've got another greeting function.
This is an expression.
It isn't put into memory initially,
but rather during execution and
when it hits this line of code,
the JavaScript engine, it creates
this function object on the fly.
And then we can invoke it using a variable
that's pointing to that memory location.
So we've seen that this is
a function statement and
this is using a function expression.
So we've seen that this is kind of
a function literal in this case,
where I'm creating a function on the fly,
I'm creating an object just like a might
a string or a number and I have that
object at this point in the code.
Well, now what's the special
thing we can do with functions,
with all functions that make
it a special kind of object?
Well, it has a code property and
what can we do with that code property?
We can invoke it.
We've already invoked it here and
invoked it here, but
we can invoke it on the fly.
So let me run this first.
And I'll just put it in the console and
we have Hello undefined,
cuz I haven't passed a variable to it.
So let's just say, John and
I'll put ('John').
Both behave the same way.
But I could, instead of calling this greet
function here, I could set a value.
Let's say,
var greeting = function(name) and
let's give it the same
exact function body.
So very similar equivalent
object that I'm creating.
And in this case, I'm going to invoke
the function at the point
where I create it.
Do you see that?
This gives me an object,
a function object.
So when this part is done evaluating,
I have a function object and
what do I do to invoke a function?
I put parenthesis.
This invokes the function
immediately after creating it.
And so
this is an Immediately Invoked
Function Expression or
an (IIFE), an IFFE.
This is a function expression and
I'm invoking it or
running it, immediately after I create it.
So although it sounds complex, it's
just describing exactly what I'm doing.
I'm immediately invoking here,
this function expression.
So let's say that this
instead returns a value.
What am I going to get in
this greeting variable?
Well, if I made it only a function
expression by itself and
then a console.log(greeting),
it's going to be what?
It's going to be a function and
then I could invoke it
to get the proper value.
Hello undefined.
I could invoke it with parameter and
then I get the better value, there.
But if instead I invoke it here,
what's going to happen?
Well, the function object will be
created using the function expression,
then it will be invoked that is called or
run and
that value will be returned and
then that will be set equal to greeting.
So when I console.log greeting in
this case, I get Hello undefined.
So I need to give it a value and
here is where I call the function,
so I need to pass it a parameter.
So, I can pass it John right there.
Do you see what's happening?
I'm creating the function,
then I'm calling the function,
like I would any function,
and I pass it the parameters.
It expects a name, so
I give it that name parameter and
then I refresh and it's the same.
But notice that greeting holds
the string not the function.
If I tried to invoke it,
it's going to error.
String is not a function.
You see?
Greeting contains a string now,
because I invoked this function and
it returned a string.
So this is an Immediately
Invoked Function Expression and
it lets me run the function at
the point that I create it.
And although it looks a little weird,
it's actually pretty simple
when you think about it.
Let's give ourself a little
bit of space here.
Again, look at it.
Look at it carefully.
I created a function on the fly
that accepts a parameter.
I run that function, I call that function,
I invoke that function and
pass the parameter immediately
after creating it and
I get the results of the function and
that's what goes into greeting.
That's what gets passed
to the equals operator.
So that's useful, but
even more interesting is if
I just have a stand alone
Immediately Invoked Function Expression
and that goes to expressions in general.
Let's scroll down this a little bit and
give ourselves some room.
I could put a line of
code at the end of this,
it's perfectly valid and
looks kind of strange.
I'll put a semi-colon
to make sure the syntax
parser understands this is one
line of code, number three.
Am I going to get an error?
Nope, no errors at the end.
This is a valid JavaScript expression.
Remember, it can just
run an expression and
it doesn't have to store in a variable or
anything, it just is there.
It runs it, it executes it and that's it.
That is so not to do anything with it.
So, I could do that.
I could do "I am a string" just
sitting there, doing nothing.
See?
I refresh, no error, that's valid.
I'm not doing anything with it,
but it's valid.
How about an object?
I could create an object using
object literal syntax and
it's just sitting there.
It's a line of code in this file,
that's being executed and no errors.
It's a valid JavaScript statement and
expression.
So I can do strings, I can do numbers.
What about functions?
Well If I was to do, let's say,
I took this function and
made it stand alone.
What's the problem here?
If I want this to be
a function expression,
where it's creating it on the fly,
do you see the problem?
If I run this, it says,
hey, Unexpected token (.
Why?
Cuz the syntax parser saw the word
function as the beginning of a new line or
segment of code,
it was after this semi-colon here.
So it expects that this is a function
statement, it wants it to have a name.
It can't be anonymous.
So this syntax is a problem.
If I just put function,
this isn't a function expression.
It's a function statement.
My normal, kind of, just write a function
the way you probably first learned to do.
That's not what I want.
I want it to just sit there.
Kind of like a 3 or "I am a string" or
something like that.
So how do we trick the syntax
parser in to understanding
that I don't intend this
to be a function statement?
Well, I need to make sue that the word
function isn't the first thing it sees
on this new line of code.
If it isn't the first character
on this new line of code,
if it isn't the first word,
then it's not a problem.
The syntax partial will understand, oh,
this can't be a function statement,
cuz a function statement has
to be the word function.
So how can I do this?
Well, there's a few
ways to do it actually.
But the most accepted, because it's
the easiest to read and look at and
it's the least amount of typing is to
wrap your function in parentheses.
This is when you want
a function expression,
instead of a normal function
statement that you might be used to.
Parenthesis inside JavaScript,
remember is an operator.
And you only use parenthesis
with expressions,
like (3+4)*2 or
something like that or I'm grouping.
It's the grouping operator.
You never put a statement inside
parentheses, like if something.
It always is an expression,
something that returns a value.
So since the JavaScript engine knows
that anything inside a parentheses must
be an expression, it assumes that
this function that you've written is
a function expression, that you're
creating this function object on the fly.
And if I run this,
once again, I have no errors.
See that?
I have a function just sitting there,
doing nothing.
And I'm not using it,
but it's valid syntax.
Here's the fun part.
Let's say, I change this to
a console.log('Hello' + name;) or
maybe I'll just be
a little bit more verbose.
I'll do a greeting = 'Hello'; and
then I'll put greeting + space and
the name that I have.
So now I have a function
that does some work,
creates some variables.
I'd like to run this.
Remember, when we had just 3 sitting
there, it didn't do anything or
"I am a string", it still put it in
memory, but then it was kind of lost.
I never did anything with it.
But what's special about
a function object, remember?
I can invoke it.
So after I see the function,
This also is an immediately
invoked function expression and
most often, what we're talking
about when we say that phrase.
A function expression wrapped in
parentheses, so that the JavaScript engine
understands that I don't mean this to be
my kind of normal function statement.
I mean this to be an expression,
something that's created on the fly.
When this line of code is executed,
I wrap it in parentheses just to trick
the syntax parser and
then I put parentheses to actually run it.
So, I'm creating a function and
running it all at the same time
and I can pass values to it.
For example, if I have var firstname and
that's 'John', I can pass firstname.
Take a good look at that.
I have a function expression, I wrapped it
in parentheses to trick the syntax parser.
And because it knows that this
is a function expression,
it creates this object on the fly and
it's invocable, cuz it's a function and
I can pass values to it.
So then, what am I going to get?
What's going to happen when
this line of code is run?
Well, let's say 'Inside IIFE: just so
we can see the difference.
See that?
Do you see what just happened?
I just wrapped all my code in a function,
created it on the fly and invoked it.
This is the classic example of an I-I-F-E,
an IIFE,
an Immediately Invoked
Function Expression.
This turns out to be a wonderful tool in
your arsenal, as a JavaScript developer.
And you'll see this form,
this style in almost
every major framework and
library that's out there today.
So take a look at this code,
try to write it yourself.
Get familiar with it, add some
extra parameters and pass them in.
Understand that we're just
executing code on the fly.
We're just executing
a function after we create it.
Now we'll see just why that's so useful.
Oh, one more thing before we go.
There's a bit of a controversy
about which syntax to use.
Everyone agrees to use parentheses,
but you could invoke it
inside the parentheses or you could
invoke it outside the parentheses.
It doesn't really matter,
both work the same way.
So which one's the right way?
The answer is there is no right way.
It's whichever one seems to
make the most sense to you.
A lot of people think this
makes the most sense,
because you're simply encapsulating
the whole thing in parentheses.
I think it's arguable,
it's more of an artistic choice.
But whatever you do,
pick one and be consistent.
So you don't cause yourself
trouble in the long run.
Let's move on.